== Code Overview

This section describes all the files in the repository and what their
purpose are:

=== Root

.`rebar.config`

The rebar3 configuration file. It contains information about the
immediate system dependencies of the project. It also contains
information for `relx` the release builder rebar3 uses. This is used
to assemble a release by copying the Erlang runtime as well as the
necessary support libraries into a release directory. This directory
can then be archived via tar(1) or zip(1) and shipped for a production
release.

.`Makefile`

Contains some convenience targets when building the software. In
practice you have some support-calls that has to be made outside the
build tool in many cases. This Makefile contains recipes for doing
that, so you don't forget what is to be done.

.`README.md`

Instructions for the reader on GitHub. Also instructions on how to
build the documentation and where to go next.

.`rebar.lock`

Dependency locking for reproducible builds. It makes sure you get
versions of packages which are known to be working together and that
upgrades of software is a deliberate action rather than an implicit
one.

.`config/vm.args`

Release VM arguments. The release handler makes sure these become part
of the system release so you can set parameters on the command line of
the Erlang runtime. It is often used to fine-tune schedulers, memory
allocation, or the upper bound on processes or ports.

.`config/sys.config`

The configuration file of the release. This allows us to override
application-specific configuration knobs in the final release. Often,
configuration can be handled by adding a call to
`application:get_env/3` in the source code and then adding a default
value to an applications `.app` file. Then it can be overridden in the
`sys.config` file later, if a release needs a different setting.
Another common use is to provide varying configuration for different
environments.

.`apps/*`

The applications provided by this repository. See the following
sections for their description.

=== Application `sw_core`

.`priv/sw.schema`

The schema definition file which can be read by the {project}
system. It defines the schema rules for the Star Wars API.

.`src/sw_core.app.src`

Application description file which `rebar3` compiles into
`ebin/sw_core.app`. It contains a number of important sections for the
project:

* Dependencies--Listing what this application needs in order to
  function correctly. The release manager arranges the boot of the
  node such that every dependent application is started first. In
  short, it carries out a topological sorting of applications
  according to their dependencies and starts them in the right order.
* Start module--Which module to invoke in order to start the
  application.
* Environment--Application specific environmental defaults. In order
  to keep the `sys.config` file small sane defaults can be added here
  so they don't clutter the global configuration.

.`src/sw_core_app.erl`

The application behavior used to start the `sw_core` application. This
file also contains the schema-loading code: when the system boots, we
attempt to load and validate the schema. Any mistake will abort the
boot process and print out a failure.

.`src/sw_core_db.hrl`

This header file contains the records we are using in our Mnesia
database. One could have spread these over multiple files, but since
the system is fairly small we use a single file for this. It is likely
a larger system would split this into smaller sections.

.`src/sw_core_db.erl`

Wrapper around the database calls which are common in the system. Also
contains the functions for creating the initial schema, which can be
invoked without the `sw_core` application running.

.`src/sw_core_id.erl`

Handling of _ID_ values in the Graph from the client. Provides
encoding and decoding of identifier values so we know what object they
refer to internally.

.`src/sw_core_scalar.erl`

Input and output coercion for scalar values

.`src/sw_core_type.erl`

Describes how this GraphQL instance converts from abstract types such
as Interfaces and Unions to concrete types. For instance how the
system converts from the *Transport* interface to a *Starship* or
*Vehicle*.

.`src/sw_core_sup.erl`

Top level supervisor referring to long-lived processes in this
application.

NOTE: Currently there are no such long-lived processes in the
application.

.`src/sw_core_film.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Film*.

.`src/sw_core_object.erl`

Code for resolving generic objects not covered more modules which
specialize to a particular object type. Generic objects are
represented as maps in the system and this module handles maps in
general. This allows us to easily construct new types in the Graph
without having to write special handlers for each.

.`src/sw_core_paginate.erl`

This file implements generic pagination code for the API. It is an
implementation of {relay}'s conventions for paginations and cursors
(see <<pagination>>).

.`src/sw_core_person.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Person*.

.`src/sw_core_planet.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Planet*.

.`src/sw_core_query.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Query*. The query object is main
entry-point into the graph for data queries in which data is read out
of the API. Notably it contains code for loading arbitrary objects if
the client obtained a handle (id) on the object earlier.

.`src/sw_core_species.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Species*.

.`src/sw_core_starship.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Starship*.

.`src/sw_core_vehicle.erl`

Code for resolving objects of type *Vehicle*.

=== Application `sw_web`

This application implements the web UI and the HTTP transport on top
of the Core application.

.`src/sw_web_app.erl`

Application callback for the `sw_web` application. Also initializes
the cowboy web server with its dispatch rules and the configuration of
cowboy.

.`src/sw_web_graphql_handler.erl`

The main handler for GraphQL requests in the system. It provides
transport between GraphQL and HTTP.

.`src/sw_web_sup.erl`

Main supervisor. Currently it has no children, but exists as a way to
appease the application controller by giving the application a
specific `pid()` it can use to know if the application is up and
running.

.`src/sw_web_response.erl`

Wrapper around responses. It makes sure that an Erlang term is
representable in JSON by converting something like a tuple into a binary
value. This allows a JSON encoder to handle the Erlang term without
problems.

Another reason for doing this is that we eliminate a lot of 500 Status
code responses from the system.


